Expand the Access Controls reference (#32696)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/access-controls/reference.mdx

---
title: Teleport Access Controls Reference
description: Explains the configuration settings that you can include in a Teleport role, which enables you to apply access controls for your infrastructure.
tocDepth: 3
---

This guide shows you how to use Teleport roles to manage role-based access
controls (RBAC) in your Teleport cluster.

A Teleport role manages access by having two lists of rules: `allow` rules and
`deny` rules.  When declaring access rules, keep in mind the following:

- Nothing is allowed by default.
- Deny rules get evaluated first and take priority.

> To manage cluster roles, as well as other dynamic resources, a Teleport
> administrator can use the Web UI or a [Teleport client
> tool](../management/dynamic-resources.mdx) like `tctl`, the Teleport Terraform
> provider, or the Teleport Kubernetes operator, as well as [custom API
> clients](../api/rbac.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can any of the following to manage cluster roles and other dynamic resources:

- Teleport Web UI
- [Teleport clienttool](../management/dynamic-resources.mdx) like `tctl`
- Teleport Terraform provider
- Teleport Kubernetes operator
- [custom API clients](../api/rbac.mdx)
```
I'm not sure this feels particularly natural here, but the two "as well as" clauses seemed a little tricky to pull off.

      where: '!contains(ssh_session.participants, user.metadata.name)'
```

> ## Role predicates

Reviewer 2: Should we call this "role templates" instead?

In a Teleport role resource, certain fields allow you to use functions and
variables to configure a user's access. The functions and variables available
for a field depend on the access controls that the field configures.

### Access Request predicate functions

The following variables and functions allow more fine-grained control over a
user's permissions to submit and review Access Requests.

#### Fields

You can use Access Request predicate functions in the following fields. You can
include these fields within either `allow` rules or `deny` rules:

- `request.search_as_roles`
- `request.roles`
- `review_requests.preview_as_roles`
- `review_requests.roles`
- `review_requests.where`

#### Functions

Access Requests support the following role predicate functions:

|Function|Description|
|---|---|
|`{{regexp.match(regexp)}}`|Returns `true` if the regular expression matches a user's role.|
|`{{regexp.not_match(regexp)}}`|Returns `true` if the regular expression does not match a user's role.|

> Regular expressions support both wildcards (the `*` character) and [Go-style

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regular expressions support both glob-style wildcards (the `*` character) and [Go-style
```

regular expressions](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp). If an expression begins with
the `^` character and ends with the `$` character, Teleport will evaluate it as
a regular expression. Otherwise, it will evaluate it as a wildcard expression.
Wildcards match a sequence of one or more characters.

#### Variables

Teleport does not perform variable expansion on the values of the fields above.

### Label expressions

> <Admonition type="warning">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Does this really warrant a Warning?

Reviewer 2: Because it's so new, I would say yes. (at least for the v13 and v12 versions of the docs)

If you don't see this, and you create a label expression on too old of a version, you will think you are enforcing security properties when you are not. This could lead to unintended infrastructure access, which would be a critical incident.

Label expressions are available starting in Teleport version `13.1.1`.
All components of your Teleport cluster must be upgraded to version `13.1.1`

> or newer before you will be able to use label expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or newer before you can use label expressions.
```

This includes the Auth Service and **all** Teleport agents.
</Admonition>

Teleport roles support matching resource labels with predicate expressions when
you need to:

- combine logic with OR and AND operators
- perform matching on label keys
- implement negative matches

The following example role would allow access to any nodes labeled `env=staging`
or labeled `team=<team>`, where `<team>` is one of the values of the user's
`teams` trait:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v7
metadata:
  name: example-role
spec:
  allow:
    node_labels_expression: |
      labels["env"] == "staging" ||
      contains(user.spec.traits["teams"], labels["team"])
```

> Typically you will only want to use one of `<kind>_labels` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, you would only use either `<kind>_labels` or
```

`<kind>_labels_expression` in a single role, but you are allowed to specify
both.

> If you have both in a deny rule, the matching is greedy, if either one matches
> access will be denied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have both in a deny rule, the matching is greedy. If either expression matches,
access is denied.
```

> In an allow rule, the matching is not greedy, if both are set they both have to
> match for access to be allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an allow rule, the matching is not greedy. If both expressions are set, both expressions must be
matched for access to be allowed.
```

#### Fields

The `<kind>_labels_expression` fields have the same purpose as the matching

> `<kind>_labels` fields, but support predicate expressions instead of label

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`<kind>_labels` fields, but support label expressions instead of label
```

I still think we need to call these by their proper name. Label expressions are different than the generic predicate language used to search and filter resources.

matchers.  They can be used in the following fields of role `spec.allow` and
`spec.deny` conditions:

- `node_labels_expression`
- `app_labels_expression`
- `cluster_labels_expression`
- `kubernetes_labels_expression`
- `db_labels_expression`
- `db_service_labels_expression`
- `windows_desktop_labels_expression`
- `group_labels_expression`

#### Variables

> You can use the following template variables in label expression fields:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the following variables in label expression fields:
```

|Variable|Type|Description|
|---|---|---|

> |`{{user.spec.traits}}`|`map[string][]string`|All of the user's traits. Use `{{user.spec.traits<key>}}` to get a list of trait values for the specified key.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|`user.spec.traits`|`map[string][]string`|All of the user's traits. Use `user.spec.traits[<key>]` to get a list of trait values for the specified key.|
```

Author: Restoring the "Label expressions" section to the way it was before this PR.

> |`{{labels}}`|`map[string]string`|All of the user's labels. Use `{{labels.<key>}}` to get the value for the specified key.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|`labels`|`map[string]string`| Combined static and dynamic labels of the resource (server, application, etc.) being accessed. Use `labels[key]` to get the value for the specified key.|
```

Author: Restoring the "Label expressions" section to the way it was before this PR.

#### Functions

You can use the following functions in label expression fields:

|Function|Description|
|---|---|
|`{{contains(list,item)}}`|Returns `true` if the list of strings in `list` contains the specified `item` and `false` otherwise.|
|`{{regexp.match(list,regexp)}}`|Returns `true` if the regular expression in `regexp` matches any of the strings in list of strings `list`. Returns `false` otherwise.|

> |`{{regexp.replace(list,regexp,replacement)}}`|Checks the list of strings `list`, returning a new list where each item that matches `regexp` is replaced with `replacement`. You can use `$n` in the replacement string to indicate a submatch group, e.g., `$1` to indicate the first submatch.|

Reviewer 3: I think the text I currently have on the predicate page is more accurate
> Replaces all matches of `re` with `replacement` for all items in `list`

Because each item in the list might have one or more match for `re`, and each match will be replaced within that item. Currently it sounds like the whole item will be replaced.

|`{{strings.upper(list)}}`|Returns the new list of strings that results from uppercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|

> |`{{strings.lower(list)}}`|Returns the new list of strings that results from lowercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|

Reviewer 3: Label expressions are different, they are not templates, they do not use the double-brace (`{{}}`) syntax.

With role templates, all templated fields with `{{}}` are populated at once based on the user traits to output the final role for the user. Label expressions are not templated, they are always expressions, and are evaluated at runtime when making access decisions. They take as input both the user's traits and the labels of a specific resource they are currently trying to access.

Author: Thanks! I'll restore the "Label expressions" section to the way it was before this PR.

> |`{{contains(list,item)}}`|Returns `true` if the list of strings in `list` contains the specified `item` and `false` otherwise.|
> |`{{regexp.match(list,regexp)}}`|Returns `true` if the regular expression in `regexp` matches any of the strings in list of strings `list`. Returns `false` otherwise.|
> |`{{regexp.replace(list,regexp,replacement)}}`|Checks the list of strings `list`, returning a new list where each item that matches `regexp` is replaced with `replacement`. You can use `$n` in the replacement string to indicate a submatch group, e.g., `$1` to indicate the first submatch.|
> |`{{strings.upper(list)}}`|Returns the new list of strings that results from uppercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|
> |`{{strings.lower(list)}}`|Returns the new list of strings that results from lowercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|`contains(list,item)`|Returns `true` if the list of strings in `list` contains the specified `item` and `false` otherwise.|
|`regexp.match(list,regexp)`|Returns `true` if the regular expression in `regexp` matches any of the strings in list of strings `list`. Returns `false` otherwise.|
|`regexp.replace(list,regexp,replacement)`|Checks the list of strings `list`, returning a new list where each item that matches `regexp` is replaced with `replacement`. You can use `$n` in the replacement string to indicate a submatch group, e.g., `$1` to indicate the first submatch.|
|`strings.upper(list)`|Returns the new list of strings that results from uppercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|
|`strings.lower(list)`|Returns the new list of strings that results from lowercasing each item in `list`, a list of strings.|
```

> ### Predicates for access to infrastructure resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Predicates for access to infrastructure resources
```
Might just be my ignorance, but I don't see the connection between this heading and the paragraph and bullets that follow.

Reviewer 3: I don't think of the below as predicates. I'll borrow a wikipedia definition for predicate:
> A predicate is a statement or mathematical assertion that contains variables, sometimes referred to as predicate variables, and may be true or false depending on those variables’ value or values.

Label expressions and search filters *are* predicates, because they evaluate to true or false. The below like `logins: "{{internal.logins}}"` is not a predicate that is true or false. It is a template that can be populated with the user traits to produce a value, like `logins: ["nic", "root"]`

When a user attempts to authenticate to an infrastructure resource
proxied by Teleport, such as a database or Kubernetes cluster, Teleport determines from the user's roles:

> - Which infrastructure resources the user is authorized to authenticate to. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Whether the user is authorized to connect
```

It seems odd to say "when attempting to connect to a specific resource Teleport determines all possible resources the user is allowed to connect to"

- Which principals the user can assume when they authenticate (for example,
  Linux server logins and Kubernetes groups).

#### Fields

The following role fields control a user's access to infrastructure resources.
All of these are fields within the `allow` and `deny` sections of a Teleport
role resource.

Labels for resources enrolled with Teleport:

> - `app_labels`

Reviewer 2: I think we should introduce `app_labels` before `app_labels_expression` as it is simpler and much more common in practice.

- `cluster_labels`
- `db_labels`
- `db_service_labels`
- `kubernetes_labels`
- `node_labels`
- `windows_desktop_labels`

> Principals a user can assume on third-party systems:

Reviewer 2: +1 I'm not sure either

> Principals a user can assume on third-party systems:

Author: Is "infrastructure resources" clearer?

- `aws_role_arns`
- `azure_identities`
- `db_names`
- `db_roles`
- `db_users`
- `desktop_groups`
- `gcp_service_accounts`
- `host_groups`
- `host_sudoers`
- `kubernetes_groups`
- `kubernetes_users`
- `logins`
- `windows_desktop_logins`

Teleport principals that user can impersonate:
- `impersonate.rules`
- `impersonate.users`

#### Functions

You can use the following functions in role fields that govern access to
principals on external systems. Both functions can take a template variable

> named above as an argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an argument:
```

Author: Removed this sentence, since the list of variables is below the list of functions.

|Function|Description|
|---|---|
|`{{email.local(variable)}}`|Extracts the local part of an email address.|
|`{{regexp.replace(variable, expression, replacement)}}`|Finds all matches of the expression within the variable and replaces them with the replacement.|

> #### Variables

Reviewer 2: These are typically referred to as "traits"

For fields that configure access to infrastructure resources, Teleport
substitutes the following variables with data from the authenticating user,
drawing from the local user database as well as the user's external single
sign-on provider.

| Variable | Description |
| - | - |
| `{{internal.logins}}` | Substituted with a value stored in Teleport's local user database and logins from a root cluster. <br/><br/>For local users, Teleport will substitute this with the "allowed logins" parameter used in the `tctl users add [user] <allowed logins>` command. <br/><br/>If the role is within a leaf cluster in a [trusted cluster](../management/admin/trustedclusters.mdx), Teleport will substitute the logins from the root cluster whether the user is a local user or from an SSO provider. <br/><br/>As an example, if the user has the `ubuntu` login in the root cluster, then `ubuntu` will be substituted in the leaf cluster with this variable. |

> |`{{internal.azure_identities}}`| Returns the Azure identities defined in Teleport available to the user. Azure identities can set for a specific user or defined in a role.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`{{internal.azure_identities}}`| Returns the Azure identities defined in Teleport available to the user. Azure identities can be set for a specific user or defined in a role.|
```

|`{{internal.db_names}}`|List of all allowed database names for the user.|
|`{{internal.db_users}}`|List of all allowed database users for the user.|
|`{{internal.gcp_service_accounts}}`|List of GCP service accounts for the user.|
|`{{internal.kube_username}}`|Kubernetes usernames available to the user.|
|`{{internal.kubernetes_groups}}`|List of allowed Kubernetes groups for the user.|
|`{{internal.kubernetes_users}}`|List of allowed Kubernetes users for the user.|
|`{{internal.logins}}`|List of allowed SSH logins for the user.|
|`{{internal.windows_logins}}`|List of allowed Windows logins for the user.|

> | `{{external.xyz}}` | Substituted with a value from an external [SSO provider](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_sign-on). If using SAML, this will be expanded with "xyz" assertion value. For OIDC, this will be expanded a value of "xyz" claim. See the next section for more information on referring to the `external` variable in Teleport roles. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `{{external.xyz}}` | Substituted with a value from an external [SSO provider](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_sign-on). If using SAML, this variable is expanded with the "xyz" assertion value. For OIDC, the variable is expanded to the value of the "xyz" claim. See the next section for more information on referring to the `external` variable in Teleport roles. |
```

#### Accessing external traits in Teleport roles

When a user authenticates to Teleport through a single sign-on identity provider
(IdP), Teleport populates external variables using traits it receives from the
IdP.

For example, assuming you have the following SAML assertion attribute in your
response:

```
<Attribute Name="http://schemas.microsoft.com/ws/2008/06/identity/claims/windowsaccountname">
        <AttributeValue>firstname.lastname</AttributeValue>
</Attribute>
```

... you can use the following format in your role:

```
logins:
   - '{{external["http://schemas.microsoft.com/ws/2008/06/identity/claims/windowsaccountname"]}}'
```

In role templates, you can refer to these variables using the following two
formats, where `trait` is the name of the trait:

- **Dot syntax:** `{{external.trait}}`
- **Bracket syntax:** `{{external["trait"]}}`

> Teleport will expand the template variables above with the value of the SAML
> attribute or OIDC claim called `trait`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport expands the template variables with the value of the SAML
attribute or OIDC claim called `trait`.
```

attribute or OIDC claim called `trait`.

You can specify an external trait in dot syntax if it begins with a letter and
contains only letters, numbers, and underscores. Otherwise, you must use bracket
syntax to specify a trait.

Common examples of external traits available through an identity provider
include the following:

- `{{external.logins}}`
- `{{external.username}}`
- `{{external.env}}`

Teleport can only expand an `external` variable to a string or a list of
strings. If you are using an OIDC-based SSO solution, ensure that you have
configured your identity provider to include claims with values that have a
supported data type.

Refer to your identity provider's documentation for the complete list of
available claims and attributes.

### Access Request template functions

The following variables and functions allow more fine-grained control over a
user's permissions to submit and review Access Requests.

#### Fields

You can use Access Request template functions in the following fields. You can
include these fields within either `allow` rules or `deny` rules:

- `request.search_as_roles`
- `request.roles`

> - `review_requests.preview_as_roles`

Reviewer 4: `regexp.match` does not work with `preview_as_roles` and I think it probably doesn't work with `search_as_roles` either.

The tests show it working only with thresholds filter and `review_requests.where`.

https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/b05a3a79864cc1e709025d183b8a3663f90f13ea/lib/services/access_request_test.go#L242-L248

https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/b05a3a79864cc1e709025d183b8a3663f90f13ea/lib/services/access_request_test.go#L274-L277
